# Conformance Working Group - Pre-meeting

Note: this group consists of Steve Winslow and members who accepted the invitation from the presto-conformance-wg mailing list.

##### Agenda
* Introduction (Tim)
* Conforming working group status and next steps (Tim)
* Conforming Program operations (Steve W)

##### Attendees 

* Steve Winslow (LF)
* Tim Meehan (Facebook)
* Rohan Pednekar (Ahana)
* Steven Mih (Ahana)
* Dipti Borkar (Ahana)
* Gale McCommons (LF)
* Gurmeet Singh (Uber)
* Vivek Bharathan (Ahana)

#### Notes from the meeting

Tim gave status update on conformance program and next steps
	1. Finalize the document establishing the group.  That should be done today.
	2. After that, we’ll begin voting on who will chair the group.  I think this will go to everyone here.
	3. Once a chair is established,  the chair will work with the group to establish a cadence for meetings.
	4. Updates will be reviewed at the TSC meeting.


Steve Winslow led a discussion on the operations of the conformance program. working group.

Steve began sharing his slides.  He emphasized the antitrust policy on details regarding that.

Idea is that an open source project has a name and a logo.  The purpose of the name and logo are to direct people to the open source project itself, and not downstream things that are developed from it.  We want a way for downstream users, distributors, anything compatible to communicate to their own ecosystem that they are conformant in a defined way with the project.  We can define a conformance mark (text) and a badge that is specific to the conformance aspect.  The idea then is that the project’s technical community also goes through and develop in the context of that specific project (this will vary from project to project, depends on the technical details).  The technical community defines what it technically means for downstream distributions to establish a definition of what conformance means to interoperate with aspects of the project.

Terms and conditions are established and once they signed up for it they can determine that their product meets the conformance definition.  If they do that successfully, then in exchange for signing up in exchange of T&C and passing tests, they can use that conforming statement and logo badge and use it in connection with their marketing.  

Tim asked what happens when things fall out of conformance.

Steve says that it’s not point in time.  Two things can cause it to be non-conformant:
1) Change in the project itself.
2) Change in the downstream product as they release new versions.

For 1, this is something that varies between project to project, typically the project will have a certain cadence when new versions are released.  Conformance definition is kept in sync with each release.  Typically that definition is kept up to date as releases are put out.  T&C typically says, to remain conformant, you must remain conformant with each new release, or X prior releases.  In general, to remain conformant, you must be kept up to date with the latest conformance defintion.  (Ties into antitrust topics.). People are still free to make changes, but it just enforces mark and logo.

For 2, as the project grows and evolves, how does the product keep in sync.  If the vendor releases a product, are they required to stay conformant as the product evolves?  Answer is yes, new versions must pass the tests.  Typically projects handle this via letting users in the community to test themselves if a product is non-conformant.  

Because an open source license can let anyone do anything with it, it allows people int he community to innovate.  Flip side is it’s easy for the community to diverse.  Incompatible changes/plugins etc.  Partly the idea is to keep the trademark to the project itself, to make clear trademark refers to product itself.  Conformance makes clear that this is a signal that any derivative product will operate in the ways set out in conformance definition.  Think: USB logo.  You have confidence that this signifies it is really a USB compatible device.   Establishes greater trust that this signifies functional compatiblility.

Rohan: do we stick with specific version that we just released, or any version at all?

Steve: typically there is point in time release of project source code.  Create a testing suite at version 1.X.  Point it at something interoperable with the project.  Long winded way of saying it’s tied to particular release of software.  

Tim: is there a time bound for release versions?

Steve: it is typically time bounded.  6 months, 12 months, etc. go by, typically people need to stay conformant with the versions.  Brand new products must stay in conformance with the latest version.  Typically the idea would be projects would keep a conformance versoin alive and maintained for as long as they support the code going forward.  Older ones are not typically maintained forever.

Dipti: as more changes get added to the project itself, then it’s important for the project to roll forward especially for users to get the features they are expecting.

Steve: typically cadence is tied to major releases.  With each major release, products can determine if they want to remain conformant.  Asked a question released to release vs API version.

Dipti: certain release had new connectors go in.  If you want to remain conformant, you need those connectors.  Vs. API level, features, stuff like that.  

Steve: Guiding star is whatever the user in the ecosystem is expected to see, is what you would expect for a conformance program spec.

Steve: one other thing.  Project can often have different levels of conformance.  This is something that is set into the T&C.  T&C often punts technical details into a conformance guide, legal framework is set but technical details are not set so that community can maintain it.  One thing we can build into T&C is the idea of profiles: there would be a base level of conformance, minimum viable for product to be interoperable, but then there can also be additional tests that can be met.  Sometimes functional areas like security, performance, where if you meet the additional criteria you get recognized for ti.

Tim: does this get recognized into the mark/logo?

Steve: yes, this gets reflected into the badge and logo, some stylized tags below badge get incorporated there as well.  Example: Presto Conformant, Presto Conformant + Security, etc.

Gurmeet: Just thinking what we are talking about, various levels of conformance, interface levels of conformance (Presto SQL language), performance (same expected results), all storage backends, fourth level is code has not diverged much from the open source version.  Are we even trying to make sure that the Presto they are running is the same Presto through engine metrics, or what is the boundary?  Will it be treated as a block box, or white box as well?

Steve: What I would say is those first three levels are the right ones to think about: what does it do, how does it operate, how do users interact with it, does it do the things that users should expect it to do if it interoperates with levels?  There are degrees and we can decide on which levels need to be present, and WG can decide on all of that.  On this inside, what is the code running internally, this goes beyond where a conformance program should look.  That starts to get too far beyond enabling interoperability.  

Gurmeet: would tools to check conformance, who develops that? 

Steve M: Wanted to ask about a clarifying question about earlier above.  There’s “what is Presto”, distributed query engine, black box.  That is separate from what is Presto conformance.  That means what it is is definition of what that black box.  E.g. look there’s a dashboarding tool that interacts with the black box, then that means vendors etc would work on that basis.  Is that correct understanding?

Steve W: clarify that projects can clarify how that works.  Some do either/or 1. Defining conformance for software that functionally deviate from the project itself and still be considered conformant.  High level, that’s the idea for a distribution.  Additionally, 2. A project could define something like plugins, something that is separate or related tool that interfaces with the project distribution itself.  Which of those the project decides to do will depend on how this group interfaces with TSC and GB.

Steve M: Makes sense.  Take recent examples.  Kubernetes conformance, what plugs in with Kubernetes rather than what it would do.  

Steve W: That is more about a distribution of Kubernetes, whether as a distributed product, it is more about the distribution and implementation of Kubernetes itself, and that APIs that are developed by the community conforms with those expectation.   The Kubernetes self-testing suite is something that developer download and run against their distribution of Kubernetes so that APIs return expected values and returns a pass/fail.  Testing process does not go deeper than the interfaces.  Does it do what appears to be the right thing. 

Steve M: Say for example Kubernetes does something, schedules containers, if Docker DC based on Docker Swarm, they could say you don’t need to use Kubernetes, how does that help anybody.

Steve W: They are saying they are Kubenetes compliant based on the interfaces.  The idea there was that they wanted to make it possible that for that defined set of interfaces, there would not be any vendor locking.  So if they set up workloads on Kubernetes supporting thing, and they are doing things within the Kubernetes conformance definition, they will have a guarantee of behavior and functionality.

Gurmeet: self-testing suite.  Are we saying that this is the definition of conformance.  At one level it’s a definition, at another level it’s a tool that gets involved.  Trying to understand if it includes both.

Steve W: You’re thinking about it the right way.  The tools are parallel but tied closely to the conformance definition.  Step back: with projects with conformance programs, there is a spectrum of rigor.  Less rigorous it’s just self-attestation.  On the other far end of the spectrum there is the third party testing lab.  That third party takes the participants project and they run the tests themselves.  More rigorous, more costly for participants because there’s the cost of paying that party.  Middle part is there are tools that are developed by the community which is what we’re talking about.   With projects this can evolve and grow over time.

Gurmeet: middle ground sounds good.  

Steve M: separate topic about, we are looking at ways to increase the budget of the Presto Foundation so it can continue to operate in black, one way conformance programs operate, additional benefit is that there is a small charge that is returned to the Presto Foundation.

Steve W: something that within the scope of GB.  Other projects, one of a couple things.  A project could charge a fee, a fee is paid.  Second thing is, free for CNCF members, not free for non-members.  Helps drive membership to the project itself. 

Steve M: why would a Kubernetes conformance program be designed to enable Docker DC to be compatible to replace Kubernetes, why would a conformance program want to come up with that definition?  Why would it not encourage to use project itself?

Steve W: Must be conscious of antitrust considerations.  Other part is, distinction between what is mandates vs. the incentives of the project.  Given the conformance definition is closely tied to the way the project software performs, the releases of the project and how the project evolves, people will be motivated to participate to the project itself, to the conformance definition, test suite, if they don’t do this, it will be difficult to maintain parity with what’s mandated by the conformance definition.  Best way to do that is to show up and participate in the community,.  If there’s an attempt to add something that is different from what Presto is, then it will be difficult to build consensus. 

Back to slides.  Roles.  Technical community is TSC + conformance WG.  Defines conformance, documentation, tools, etc.  

In parallel, GB has authority whether to launch the conformance program, as aspect of oversight.

WG purpose.  Coordinate the development and ongoing maintenance of the conformance program for Presto.

WG scope: do the things discussed above.  TSC can give thumbs up for the products of the WG.

Out of scope: business plans for how participants sell/license products.  Compliance.  Terms and conditions.  Established by LF staff, inline with primarily with GB.

WG principles: openness, neutrality, technical merit, objectivity.

WG chairperson is appointed by TSC.  Chairperson will facilitate the operations of the WG.  Steer the community towards reaching consensus.  There are some topics where consensus can’t be reached, keep TSC informed progress of the working group generally, and also instances where consensus can’t be reached.  

TSC and GB have final decision making authority.  Following that regular cadence of meeting should be established by the chairperson.    What are the technical areas of scope.  Conversations between TSC/GB/WG.

