# Conformance Working Group - kick off meeting

### 2021-08-13
##### 10:30 AM PST to 11:00 AM PST

##### How to Join

Conformance Program WG meetings are open for all to join.

* https://zoom.us/j/94981266740?pwd=enh3U3dSQmFiM0d5WHVUb2dJdkErQT09
* password: `pfconf`

#### Agenda
* Team Introduction
* Presto Conformance Working Group Governance (Rohan)
* Discussion topics
    * Cadence of meeting
    * Phases of conformance
* Next meeting topic.


#### Attendees 
* Rohan Pednekar (Ahana)
* Gurmeet Singh (Uber)
* Tim Meehan (Facebook)
* Kamil Bajda-Pawlikowski (Starburst)

#### Notes from the meeting

Rohan Thanked the team members for participating in the Conformance WG and being valuable member of the Presto Community.  

After quick round of introduction, we gone through [Purpose, Scope, Principles and Responsibilities of the WG](https://github.com/prestodb/tsc/blob/master/working-groups/conformance-wg.md)
reference to [Steve Wilson's Session](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UELBuyRvm5Q)

In terms of cadence of meetings; We agreed on conducting bi-weekly meetings for the conformance group, 2nd and 4th week of the month.

Futher, Rohan outlined the Conformance Program in two phases to simplify the experimence. 
* Phase 1: Conformance definition
* Phase 2: Implementation of conformance

For Conformance definition, we discussed it is important to undersand how we define Presto, what are the Key differenctiators and Stregnth that defines Presto. This will further help to define what meant to be Conformant.
Tim, sugessted to create Google doc so that team members can contribute and once we have greater alignement we can move further in term of timeline.

##### Action Items:
* Rohan will create and share a google doc to draft the Conformance Defination, so that WG can contribute to it.
* Define date for the next meeting.

##### Next meeting topic:
Brainstrom conformance definition






