# Conformance WG  meeting

### 2022-01-13
##### 10:00 AM PST to 10:0450 AM PST

##### How to Join

Conformance Program WG meetings are open for all to join.

* https://zoom.us/j/94981266740?pwd=enh3U3dSQmFiM0d5WHVUb2dJdkErQT09
* password: `pfconf`

#### Agenda
* Revisit Goal of the Program
* Presto Conformance Working Group Scope
* Ocerview of other Conformance Projects
* Draft of Presto Conformace Defination
* Sub-projects and Immediate tasks


#### Attendees 
* Rohan Pednekar (Ahana)
* Gurmeet Singh (Uber)
* Kamil Bajda-Pawlikowski (Starburst)

#### Notes from the meeting

##### Why We Created a Presto Conformance Program?

Consistency: Users want a consistent experience when interacting with any installation of PrestoDB, and where a difference exists, we want to give users an easy understanding of what to expect and avoid any confusion.

Innovation: to enable more parallel innovation. Several organizations are already contributing to contribute to Presto Project. This means that everyone can improve their own implementations and contribute back to the project

Timely updates: To remain certified, vendors need to provide the <latest> version of PrestoDB (TBD), so you can be sure that you’ll always have access to the latest features the community has been working hard to deliver. 

Confirmability: Any end-user can confirm that their distribution or platform remains Presto conformant by running the open-source conformance application (TBD) that was used to certify. 

Support: You got covered for community support, bug fixes, integrations for the certified release of PrestoDB

##### What Makes Presto Presto

To understand what defines Presto and to define what tests need to be run for which software and services in a fair, transparent, and consistent manner, we have defined the following categories to keep overhead and confusion at a minimum:*
* Behavioral 
* API Protocol 
* Reliability
* Security and Privacy

https://docs.google.com/document/d/1GUoCAXHxHU-x8FtG_ZvPGy7IXhzaQl5MFbG_LV90HxM/edit#heading=h.98sni56dqply 

##### How other projects are doing it?

* Kubernetes Conformance Program
1) Matured and 1st Conformance Program under CNCF
2) To provide consistency, timely updates and confirmability 
3) Version / Release based https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1LxSqBzjOxfGx3cmtZ4EbB_BGCxT_wlxW_xgHVVa23es/edit#gid=0 
Reference https://github.com/cncf/k8s-conformance 

* Prometheus Conformance Program
1) Very new Program
2) To avoid confusion and provide consistency
3) Version and feature based
4) Calculate Compliance %
Reference https://github.com/cncf/prometheus-conformance 

##### (Draft) Conformance Definition

To ensure consistency, to avoid any confusion and provide confirmability to the end-user that their Presto distribution or platform remains Presto conformant by running the open-source Presto conformance application (TBD) that was used to certify by vendors. 

Note: This conformance program definition will evolve/revise over time as we find time to document, specify, and test current behavior and as the functionality of Presto itself evolves.
	
##### Sub-projects
Establish the conformance definition for downstream implementations of Presto and/or other tools built to interoperate with Presto, for final approval by the TSC.
Develop a conformance test suite to provide a "pass" or "fail" result based on the conformance definition, for final approval by the TSC.
Draft the “Conformance Guide” documentation describing the conformance program testing process.
Work with the TSC and Linux Foundation staff to establish a process by which participants in the Presto conformance program will demonstrate the conformance of their products and services.
Update and revise the conformance definition and test suite on an ongoing basis to maintain alignment with new significant releases of Presto.

##### Immediate tasks

* Form a team of contributors to work on Conformance test suite
1) Budget
2) Estimation: 24-30 weeks
3) Define roles and responsibilities and time commitment for the role
* Defining scope of the categorised features
Goal: Considering the impact this work has, we want to work towards full test coverage of a feature that makes Presto Presto
* Define what tests need to be run for a feature
- Define Error-level, warning-level and information-level
- Define MUST, SHOULD and MAY test cases.
* Draft the “Conformance Guide” documentation 

##### Action Items:
* Rohan will create PR to draft the Conformance Defination, so that WG can contribute/review to it.

##### Next meeting topic:
Brainstrom conformance team formation
